This document will provide boiler documentation for each site to modify to create EML metadata for their L0 data that is harvested into ClimDB


Title: The title should be descriptive and should describe the data collected, geographic context, research site, and time frame (what, where, and when).


Climate and hydrology data submitted to the Climate and Hydrology Database Project (ClimDB/HydroDB) by Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) Sites, U.S. Forest Services Sites and other research sites, 2001-2019


Abstract: The abstract will be useful for full-text searches, and it should be rich with descriptive text. The measured parameters should also be included. Extensive description should include what, when, and where information as well as whether the dataset is ongoing or completed, some taxonomic information, and some methods description (what, where, when, and why plus parameters). If there are too many parameters for a dataset, use categories of parameters instead of listing all parameters (ex. – use nutrients instead of nitrate, phosphate, calcium, etc.) in combination with the parameters that seem most relevant for searches.


The National Science Foundation's Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) program, U. S. Forest Service Experimental Research Stations, and other ecological field stations collect and maintain extensive, long-term databases of hydrological and meteorological measurements. Daily measurement data were assembled both from historical and more recent collections until 2019 using a web harvester and data warehousing approach in the ClimDB/HydroDB database. Resulting data from one of these stations is archived here from the collection of 45 research sites including 200 stream gauging stations and 189 meteorological stations. ClimDB/HydroDB was developed using web technologies to improve access to collections of meteorological and climatological data. Individual sites controlled local data collections and a web harvester was used to continually harvest, update, and provide access to all sites' data through a common database and web interface. Measurement parameters of precipitation, air temperature and stream discharge were broadly provided, and relative humidity, solar radiation, wind speed and direction, soil temperature and other parameters were less commonly provided.


The ClimDB and associated HydroDB were developed in response to research scientist need for current and comparable climate and hydrologic data summaries for LTER sites and U.S. Forest Service Experimental Watersheds widely used in intersite comparisons, modeling studies, and land management-related studies (Henshaw et al. 1998).




Methods:


Long-term data sets of interest include streamflow (l/sec) for gaged watersheds with corresponding precipitation (mm) and ambient air temperature (oC) data that were collected simultaneous with hydrologic data and represent conditions in the watershed. Data collected at daily or more frequent intervals with a data record longer than ten years are preferred.


Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites have generally followed established LTER Climate Committee guidelines (Greenland 1986, CLIMSTAN 1999) for collecting baseline meteorological data. Standardized measurements provide a basis for coordinating meteorological measurements at two or more sites and enable intersite comparisons.




EDI Data Policy: This data package is released to the “public domain” under Creative Commons CC0 1.0 “No Rights Reserved” (see: https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). It is considered professional etiquette to provide attribution of the original work if this data package is shared in whole or by individual components. A generic citation is provided for this data package on the website https://portal.edirepository.org (herein “website”) in the summary metadata page. Communication (and collaboration) with the creators of this data package is recommended to prevent duplicate research or publication. This data package (and its components) is made available “as is” and with no warranty of accuracy or fitness for use. The creators of this data package and the website shall not be liable for any damages resulting from misinterpretation or misuse of the data package or its components. Periodic updates of this data package may be available from the website. Thank you.




Keywords:
NSF-LTER-XXX; USFS-EFR-XXX; ClimDB; HydroDB; TERN-XXX; gauging station; met station; atmospheric pressure; dew point; discharge; solar radiation; precipitation; relative humidity; wind direction; wind speed; photosynthetically active radiation; solar radiation; net radiation; snow depth; conductivity; water level; wave height; alkalinity; ocean currents; pressure; turbidity; dissolved oxygen


Creator: Arctic Tundra; Baltimore Ecosystem Study; Bonanza Creek Experimental Forest; California Current Ecosystem; Caspar Creek Experimental Watersheds; Cedar Creek Ecosystem Science Reserve; Central Arizona - Phoenix; Coweeta Hydrologic Laboratory; Fernow Experimental Forest; Fleming Creek Watersheds; Florida Coastal Everglades; Fraser Experimental Forest; Georgia Coastal Ecosystems; Great Basin Experimental Range; H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest; Harvard Forest; Horse Creek Study Watersheds; Hubbard Brook; er Station; Plum Island Ecosystem; Santa Barbara Coastal; Santee Experimental Forest Watersheds; Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge; Shortgrass Steppe; Silver Creek Experimental Watersheds; Tenderfoot Creek Experimental Forest; Shanping Ecological Research Station; Taiwan Agricultural Ecosystem Research; TFRI-Lienhuachih Research Center; The Pine Watersheds; Virginia Coast Reserve; Young Bay Experimental Forest;